---
title: The definitive ESP8266 getting started guide for programmers
tags:
  - ESP8266
  - IoT
  - wifi
  - embedded
  - arduino
  - nodeMCU
categories:
  - embedded
date: TBD
---

## What is the ESP8266?

The ESP8266 is to the IoT hobbyist what ford was to the automotive industry. It features everything you would need, comes at a ridiculusly low price and is easy to use.

It has so many applications and there are so many ways to use it that it can be quite confusing for beginners. I found myself having a lot of troubles navigating the ecosystem and I had to spend a few days researching how to do the most basic things.

That's why I wrote this guide: It is an opinionated guide showing you what I believe is the *golden path to ESP8266 development*. **I will show you the fastest way to get the most value out of this nifty module, based on my experience and on what worked best for me.**

Quoting wikipedia here: 
> The ESP8266 is a low-cost Wi-Fi microchip with full TCP/IP stack and microcontroller capability produced by Shanghai-based Chinese manufacturer Espressif Systems.

Basically a microcontroller with wifi capabilities.

The chip itself is pretty useless to the hobbyist: It has timy SMD terminals, no antenna, and very little memory. Therefore, when people talk about the EPS8266, they generally mean *a board which harnesses the ESP8266 chip*. There is a vast ecosystem of such boards and that is where people usually get confused.

## Which module should I buy?

As we saw in the previous section, the ESP8266 needs at least an antenna, some memory and a breakout board so we can plug it in our beloved breadboards. In addition, it needs a few resistors to control the boot mode (more about that later), a UART device so we can talk to it and optionally a couple push buttons to make it more convenient to work with.

I will briefly discuss the more commonly found modules. If you want to *tl;dr*, just skip ahead to the end of this section.

### ESP-XX modules

These are the most basic and widespread modules for the ESP8266. Orignially built by a company called Ai-Thinker, they feature the bare minimum hardware you'll need.

The ESP-01 is the oldest module in this familly. It features 4x2 2.5mm male pins which make it very easy to interface (note that you can not plug this directly in a breadboard as you will invariably short pairs of pins together). The web contains countless tutorials on this module so I will not discuss it further.

The ESP-12x series represents a complete redesign of the ESP-01, still by the same company. It fullfills **exactly the same role as the ESP-01**, but its interface is dramatically different. This module interfaces through 2mm solder pads, which means you will not be able to plug it in your trusty 2.5mm breadboard. It features an onboard antenna, just like the ESP-01, but is also shielded, which presumably enhances its immunity to RF interference. The most popular nowadays is the ESP-12f which boasts some "improved antenna performance".

The ESP-07 comes in the same form factor and pinout as the ESP-12f. The major difference we'll notice as hobbyists is that it doesn't have an antenna. Instead it features a *U.FL socket* in which you are supposed to plug an external antenna. This design has a significantly better range (TODO: sauce) while presumably consuming more power.

Both the ESP-12f and ESP-07 require an additional breakout board to convert the 2mm pins to 2.5mm.

There are more modules in this familly and you can take a look at [the list](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ESP8266#Ai-Thinker_modules) if you are interested. I will not detail how to use these modules in this article as this would take a whole article on its own. Just know that I advise against using these modules directly, especially for beginners. I started with these modules and lost a couple days fixing silly issues that the NodeMCU board would have spared.


### The NodeMCU boards

While these boards are specifically designed to be programmed using the NodeMCU framework, they are in fact general purpose development boards for the ESP8266 you can program however you like. These board incorporate an ESP-12f or similar module, and add to it a USB-to-UART converter, a couple push buttons, some resistors and a breadboard-friendly 2.5mm pinout.

**This is the board I recommend. Seriously, just buy this one and you'll never look back**. Despite being so complete, it merely costs one extra dollar compared to the ESP-12f alone, coming at price of just over 3$.

Be careful though, there are multiple revisions of the module. All of them work well, but I recommend you buy revision TODO (see the picture for details) because it plays more nicely on breadboards. The other boards are too wide and will cover all of the holes in your breadboard, making it very impractical to change the wiring.

[TODO: picture of different revisions of the NodeMCU. The labels are written parallel to the long edge on rev TODO, making the board narrower]

_Note: If you are wondering what NodeMCU and Node.js have in common, let me break that down for you: nothing_

**tl;dr: buy the NodeMCU board rev TODO**

You will find all of the hardware described here for ridiculously low prices on chinese export sites. I got my modules from AliExpress and all of them worked perfectly.


## Which software can I use to program the ESP8266?

Good, you now have a better understanding of the hardware landscape surrounding the ESP8266 and what features to look for. Well, that was just the beginning. The software side is even more diverse and confusing than the hardware is.
Here again, I will teach you the basics so you can fly with your own wings, but feel free to skip straight to the conclusion of this section to know which solution I recommend.


### No software

As surprising as it may seem, the ESP8266 is actually first and foremost meant to be used as a peripheral, not as the main controller in your system! It ships with a simple serial command interpreter, which means that you can do wifi communication just by sending it commands from a terminal (or another microcontroller). For instance, this is how you connect to an access point, and make a request to some API:

TODO: example


However, this is not what this tutorial is about. In this tutorial, we are interested in programming the chip itself so we can use it as a standalone platform for our IoT projects. Why bother adding a 20$ arduino in there when this chip alone can do everything for under 3$ ?!

### TODO: title

This paragraph is key to understanding the diversity of the software ecosystem for the ESP8266, so pay attention.
Espressif systems (the manufacturer of the ESP8266) initially released a software development kit in C (the programming language) that people could use to program the chip. This SDK only had chinese documentation and was rather complex so for a long time it remained obscure and hard to use.
Nowadays, I believe the documentation has been translated to english and the hobbyist community in general has aquired good knowledge of it. It is nonetheless still hard to use and not so user-friendly. **To the hobbyist, there is no point in using the low-level C libraries**.

Therer are two components of this low level SDK: the "RTOS" version and the "SDK" version. The details of each version is way beyond the scope of this article, but just know that developers must chose one and stick with it. This doesn't really matter to us because we will be using higher level frameworks that were built on top of either of these SDKs.

### Arduino

Of course, someone had to write an arduino library for the ESP8266. Using the C SDK discussed above, a compatibility layer for arduino was developped. It allows you to write applications on the ESP8266 just like you would write one for arduino.

However attractive this seems to you, just stop and read the following: I do not think it is a good idea. Googling around, it seems like ESP8266 + arduino is very popular, more so than the NodeMCU framework wich we will discuss next.
However, the arduino philosophy does not work well with the ESP8266. The ecosystem is too complex, and while I salute the effort that has been put in providing a seamless integration for the ESP8266 into this environment, I found that it did not work well in practice.
The fact is that the ESP8266 is too low-cost for such a project. Supporting the arduino APIs adds considerable overhead, and the programming model of arduino is not suited for this chip<sup>*</sup>.

I am not saying you can't use the arduino stack. You can. But in my opinion you will be more productive and save some time going directly for the NodeMCU stack.

<sup>*</sup>In the ESP8266, your application code shares CPU time with the wifi stack. This means that if some of your code runs for too long, you will crash the wifi driver and lose connection. The loop-based, imperative programming model of arduino clashes directly with this constraint.


### NodeMCU

This is the way I recommend. NodeMCU is an amazingly ambitious idea perfectly put in practice by software engineer [TODO: credits]. It solves the problems the arduino-based solution faces while still providing an extremely user-friendly environment.

NodeMCU is a lua-based operating system for the ESP8266. It contains a lua runtime and binary modules to interface with the different hardware capabilities of the EPS8266. **It is the best tradeoff between user-friendlyness and resource efficiency I am aware of**. Its programming model is event-based (the API looks very much like Node.js), which makes particularly efficient to run on this chip. **Despite being based on a scripting language (lua), I found it to run more stable than arduino applications, written in C!**.

Some people might be reticent to learn to use lua. Well I have got good new for you: you do not need to learn lua to be able to use NodeMCU. You will mostly be copy-pasting examples and hacking them around. The language is so easy to read an intuitive that you can do basic modifications without any knowlege of it. Of course biggger modifications will require a bit of learning, but the time you spend learning lua is time you would spend working around limitations of the other solutions! Trust me, there is nothing to be afraid of.

## Let's get hacking!

Alright, at this point you should be equipped with a NodeMCU board and be convinced that the NodeMCU software is the way to go. If you have another hardware setup, make sure you have a usb-to-uart adapter to communicate with your chip, and that you control the boot modes of the ESP8266 (todo: doc).

The initial setup consists in the following:
1. Download a binary image of the NodeMCU firmware
2. Flash the firmware to the chip
3. Verify that everything works fine

Then, the workflow to program an application is:
1. Edit some lua files
2. Send them to the board
3. Reboot the board
4. Go back to 1. until you are satsfied with the result

### Find your COM port

First you will want to find the COM port talking to your ESP8266 chip. The easiest way is to go into the arduino IDE, and look at the available options in _Tools_ > _Port_

TODO: insert screenshot

Select one at random, open the serial monitor (the magnifying glass icon on the top right). Make sure you select "115200 baud" and "both NL & CR" in the dropdown at the bottom of the screen. Then depending on what is currently flashed on the board, try these two commands: `print(node.info())` or else just `AT`. If the first one returns some numbers, then it means that the chip has already been flashed with a NodeMCU firmware (we are still going to replace it with our own). If the second command works, it means that the chip contains the default firmware by espressif (as discussed in the first section).

If none of them works, try another serial port. It could also be that the chip currently contains garbage and is not able to run anything, or that you booted in "flash mode" (todo: verify). If you are running a bare ESP-XX module, make sure to drive the TODO pins in "bootloader mode" as shown in table one. If you are using a NodeMCU board, press the "rst" button and try again.

[TODO: insert screenshot of communication]

Now that you know which com port talks to the ESP8266, **close the serial console**, go back to your terminal and create a variable called `PORT`. For instance, my port is `/dev/cu.usbmodem12341` so I type:

```
export PORT="/dev/cu.usbmodem12341"
```


### Initial setup

There is one major drawback with NodeMCU: The complete image with all existing modules is too big to fit on the chip! Therefore, you need to select which modules you need for a given application and create a custom image with only these modules.
Fortunately, there are shortcuts: First, the creator of NodeMCU offers a cloud build service which lets you generate custom images online. Just check the boxes you need, hit "Start your build" and you are all set.
Alternatively, I saved a copy of the firmware containing a collection of the most essential modules, which I use for almost all of my projects. You can [download it here](TODO).

Now that you have the image, it's time to flash it!


We will flash the image using a python script provided by the community: [esptool.py](https://github.com/espressif/esptool).

**All flashing operations happen in "flash" mode. To enter flash mode, hold the "TODO" button and then press "reset". The ESP8266 will reboot in flash mode. If you are running a custom hardware setup, drive the pins in "flash" mode in table _TODO_.**

First, erase the flash memory of the device by running:
```
python esptool.py --port $PORT erase_flash
```

**Now, reset your ESP8266 in flash mode again**, and proceed to flash the firmware:
(Note that at that point the chip will tend to reboot automatically in "bootloader mode". It might take some patience to get it to reboot in flash mode. I found that I sometimes need to disconnect the chip from the power source, and hold the "flash" button down while I connect it back to power).

```
esptool.py --port $PORT write_flash -fm dio 0x00000 nodemcu-essentials-2018-05-02-float.bin
```

Tadaa! You can now reboot your board one more time, in "normal" mode. It is ready to use!


### Application programming

From now on, we will use a program called [nodemcu-uploader](https://github.com/kmpm/nodemcu-uploader) to interact with the chip. Install it or just clone the repository somewhere. Test your setup with `nodemcu-uploader --version` (note: if you cloned the repo, you might need to `python /path/to/nodemcu-uploader.py --version` instead).

#### Exploring the interactive prompt

NodeMCU exposes a command prompt on its serial port which you can use to run arbitrary lua code on the chip. `nodemcu-uploader` actually uses this interface to interact with the chip. Let's open an interactive terminal with the chip to get a sense of how this works. Make sure you still have the `PORT` variable around, then run `nodemcu-uploader --port $PORT terminal`. This should open a terminal connected to your board!

Try the following command:

```
print('Hello world')
```

The device should respond by printing the string 'Hello world'. Awesome! Now how about we do a little bit of wifi?

Put your chip in `station` mode with:

```lua
wifi.setmode(wifi.STATION)
```

Then enter this to get a list of available wifi networks (it takes a few seconds to load).

```lua
wifi.sta.getap(1, function (t)
  for k,v in pairs(t) do
    print(k.." : "..v)
  end
end)
```

Now configure the chip to connect to your wifi network with the following command:

```lua
wifi.sta.config({ssid = 'YOUR_WIFI_NETWORK_NAME', pwd = 'YOUR_WIFI_PASSWORD'})
```

Wait for a dozen seconds to give it time to connect, and then confirm that you are online using the following command:

```lua
print(wifi.sta.getip())
```

If this shows 'nil', it means that the NodeMCU did not succesfully connect. Check your wifi password or give it some more time


Now that our piece of awesomness is connected to the internet, let's make some HTTP requests!

```lua
http.get("https://istheinternetdown.com/", nil, function(code, data)
  if (code < 0) then
    print("HTTP request failed")
  else
    print(code, data)
  end
end)
```

You should get a response telling you that the internet is not down (hopefully) and return your public IP address.

You can now quit the interactive session. (Note that this terminal's retarded exit sequence is "CTRL+]". If you are using a non-US keyboard use CTRL + _whatever key is next to the return key_)

#### Uploading a real program

Now that you have a sense of how the NodeMCU terminal interface works, let's write a real program and upload it to the board.

First, create a file called `env.lua`. This file will contain your wifi credentials (this is useful to avoid checking secret credentials in source control).

```lua
-- env.lua
WIFI_SSID="YOUR_NETWORK_NAME"
WIFI_PASSWORD="YOUR_NETWORK_PASSWORD"
```

Then copy the following program into a file called `init.lua`

```lua
-- init.lua
-- Loads the WIFI_NETWORK and WIFI_PASSWORD secret variables
dofile('env.lua')

-- Connect to the wifi network
wifi.setmode(wifi.STATION)
wifi.sta.config({ssid = WIFI_SSID, pwd = WIFI_PASSWORD})


-- index of the gpio connected to the onboard LED
LED_PIN=4

gpio.mode(LED_PIN, gpio.OUTPUT)
gpio.write(LED_PIN, 1)

-- This will print IP informations upon successful connection
wifi.eventmon.register(wifi.eventmon.STA_GOT_IP, function(T)
    print('\n\tSTA - GOT IP'..'\n\tStation IP: '..T.IP..'\n\tSubnet mask: '..
    T.netmask..'\n\tGateway IP: '..T.gateway)
end)

-- Create a TCP server
sv = net.createServer(net.TCP, 30)

headers = 'Content-Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8\r\n'

-- Configure the server to print the data it gets and respond
-- with a greeting message
if sv then
  sv:listen(80, function(conn)
    conn:on('receive', receiver)
  end)
end

function receiver(sck, data)
    print(data)
    firstLine = string.sub(data, 0, string.find(data, '\n'))

    message = ''
    if string.match(firstLine, 'GET /on ') then
        message = '<pre>turned on!</pre>'
        gpio.write(LED_PIN, 0) -- Note that the led shows the inverse of the logic state of the gpio
    elseif string.match(firstLine, 'GET /off ') then
        message = '<pre>turned off!</pre>'
        gpio.write(LED_PIN, 1)
    end

    if string.match(firstLine, 'GET /') or message ~= '' then
        sck:send('HTTP/1.1 200 OK\r\n'.. headers .. '\r\n'..
                '<h1>Hello from ESP8266!</h1>' ..
                message ..
                '<a href="/on">Turn light on</a> - <a href="/off">Turn light off</a>')
    else
        sck:send('HTTP/1.1 404 NOT FOUND\r\n'.. headers .. '\r\n'..
                'Not found.<br/><a href="/">Go back home</a>')  
    end
    sck:on('sent', function () sck:close() end)
end

```

Finally, upload both files to the board using nodemcu-uploader:

```
nodemcu-uploader --port $PORT upload env.lua init.lua
```

When you reboot your board, it will look for the file called "init.lua" and run that program. It is useful for debugging purposes to connect to the terminal with `nodemcu-uploader --port $PORT terminal` while your board is booting. This shows a bunch of info as well as any `print` statement you put in your code.

Here is what I got:
```
--- Miniterm on /dev/cu.usbmodem12341  115200,8,N,1 ---
--- Quit: Ctrl+] | Menu: Ctrl+T | Help: Ctrl+T followed by Ctrl+H ---
[some redacted garbage characters. This is a normal behavior of the ESP8266]

NodeMCU custom build by frightanic.com
	branch: master
	commit: 8181c3be7aed9f0a0ceb73ac8137c1a519e8a8e9
	SSL: true
	modules: cron,enduser_setup,file,gpio,http,i2c,mdns,mqtt,net,node,pwm,rtcfifo,rtcmem,rtctime,sjson,sntp,tmr,uart,wifi,tls
 build created on 2018-07-21 18:02
 powered by Lua 5.1.4 on SDK 2.2.1(cfd48f3)
> 
	STA - GOT IP
	Station IP: 192.168.0.22
	Subnet mask: 255.255.255.0
	Gateway IP: 192.168.0.1
```

Now to test your program, take note of the "Station IP" you get and navigate there with your web browser. In my case for instance, I have to navigate to `http://192.168.0.22`.

This test program lets you control the onboard LED through an HTML interface. Note that I tested this with the ESP-07. It should also work with the ESP-12 as well as any ESP-XX based NodeMCU board where the onboard LED is connected to `GPIO2`. Other hardware may have the LED connected to a different pin or not have an LED at all.

## You are on your own now

That's it for this tutorial. You now know the basics of the ESP8266 and have a complete development setup that allows you to write any IoT application! Let me give you some additional resources and tips before you leave:

The [nodemcu documentation](https://nodemcu.readthedocs.io/en/master/en/modules/gpio/#gpiomode) is your ultimate resource to learn all of the NodeMCU APIs. It is extremely powerful and I found it to be generally intuitive to use. That being said, keep in mind that when you run an application on the ESP8266, you are pushing it to its limits. Besides the network stack, it has very limited features and processing power. Even basic HTTP stuff is poorly supported. I advise you use [MQTT](TODO link) instead, a messaging protocol adapted to IoT applications. [It is possible to run an HTTP application server on the ESP8266]() but that is a complete abuse of the chip and should never be attempted in an application you intend to deploy.

In case you do not want to put all of the pieces together yourself, or if you get stuck somewhere, I provide the "works for me" package: a zip archive containing everything you need to run the experiments shown in this tutorial.

The archive also contains a Makefile which contains helpful tasks for NodeMCU development.


TODOs:
- https://frightanic.com/iot/comparison-of-esp8266-nodemcu-development-boards/